# Free Software

There are a lot of free software packages out there. The systems I am most
familiar with are Windows and Linux. What I am providing is not an exhaustive
list of packages.

For U.K. government advice on security, see this website - [Cyber
Essentials](https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/cyberaware/home)

To get information on local Linux User Groups in the UK, see this website -
[lug.org.uk](https://lug.org.uk/)

## Windows - Free Software

### Security Software

  * For anti-virus support: Use Windows Defender - it comes free with modern versions of Windows.
  * For anti-malware support. Use <https://www.malwarebytes.com/>. The free version has to be run manually to work. The paid for version is continually running, checking your computer is OK.

### Backups

These days the hackers hold your data hostage - they encrypt it and demand a
ransom from you to get your data released - this is commonly known as
"ransomware". There are various service providers for this (Crashplan and
Dropbox) but I don't use them. Best thing to do is to keep all your software
CDs in a safe place (if there are any discs, that is) and keep spare copies of
your data, possibly on recordable CD or DVD or USB thumb drive /flash drive /
memory stick or external USB hard drives.

### Other Utilities

  * [ReactOS](https://reactos.org/) a free, open-source Windows replacement. Tries to run Windows applications and device drivers.
  * [sysinternals](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-gb/sysinternals/) by [Mark Russinovich](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/archive/blogs/markrussinovich/). 
  * [PowerToys from the Microsoft App Store](https://apps.microsoft.com/detail/XP89DCGQ3K6VLD?hl=en-gb&gl=US)
  * [7-Zip to handle additional archive files](https://7-zip.org/)
  * [VLC media player](http://www.videolan.org/vlc/index.html)
  * [paint.net](https://www.getpaint.net/index.html)
  * [GIMP - GNU Image Manipulation Program](https://www.gimp.org/)
  * [WinDirStat - find out where all your drive space is being used up](https://windirstat.net/)

### DOS and Utilities

  * Guide to [creating a bootable DOS USB stick](https://www.thomas-krenn.com/en/wiki/Creating_a_Bootable_DOS_USB_Stick) (Thomas Krenn).
  * [FreeDOS](http://www.freedos.org/) an open source DOS compatible O.S.

The GNU people have created a page about free programs and the commercial
programs they aim to replace right
[here](https://directory.fsf.org/wiki/Collection:Windows).

## Linux

With Linux (I use mainly [Ubuntu (Debian based)](https://ubuntu.com/) \- or
[Debian Linux](https://www.debian.org/) or [lubuntu](https://lubuntu.me/) on
older computers and someone I know really likes [Peppermint Linux (Debian
based)](https://peppermintos.com/) OR [Antix Linux (Debian
based)](https://antixlinux.com/)), the challenge is knowing which packages
your free software is in.

To install Ubuntu Linux, you'll need an .iso file, downloadable from
[here](http://releases.ubuntu.com/). If you want to download a flavour of
Ubuntu Linux, take a look here [here](https://cdimages.ubuntu.com/). If you
want a different Linux, take a look at [DistroWatch](https://distrowatch.com/)
to find out about other distributions of Linux.

There are other flavours of Ubuntu Linux, for those who aren't keen on Ubuntu.
The Register, in this
[article](https://www.theregister.com/2024/06/10/linux_lite_70_arrives/),
discusses [Linux Lite](https://www.linuxliteos.com/) which doesn't require as
much memory as Ubuntu.

With Linux, there are at least two databases about packages. The package
database on your computer tracks what is installed and which version it is.
The databases on the server(s) track information about the packages held on
the server. The use of a Package Manager in Linux is particularly helpful as,
in Ubuntu's case, the software is installed from servers holding repositories
of free software. A package manager can also acts as a kind of safe "Google
for packages to install". If you want some software to accomplish a particular
task, run your Package Manager and take things from there. Also, because of
the databases mentioned previously, a "Software Updater" programme can run
every so often and tell the user about newer releases of currently installed
software.

### Ubuntu specific - which flavour to use, how to install, how to get using
Ubuntu

  * [Official Ubuntu site for downloading and documentation](https://www.ubuntu.com/desktop)
  * [Official Ubuntu page for installing Ubuntu Desktop.](https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/install-ubuntu-desktop#0)
  * [Official Ubuntu page for trying Ubuntu before you install it..](https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/try-ubuntu-before-you-install#1-getting-started)
  * [MUD: Migrating From Windows to Ubuntu: The Ultimate Guide.](https://www.makeuseof.com/tag/migrating-from-windows-7-to-ubuntu/)
  * [Guide to Ubuntu flavours - variations of the main Ubuntu.](https://www.ubuntu.com/download/flavours)
  * [Forbes: Understanding the many versions (flavours) of Ubuntu.](https://www.forbes.com/sites/jasonevangelho/2018/11/28/linux-for-beginners-understanding-the-many-versions-of-ubuntu/)
  * [Extensions for the GNOME desktop.](https://extensions.gnome.org)

### Frugal Linuxes

Alan, another refurbisher of unwanted systems, likes to use [antiX
Linux](https://antixlinux.com/) on his old systems, something I haven't
experimented with... another thing I haven't experimented with is
[xubuntu](https://xubuntu.org/). For information about different Linux or BSD
operating systems, see [DistroWatch](https://distrowatch.com).

There is also [Tiny Core Linux](http://forum.tinycorelinux.net/index.php)
(core is text only, TinyCore has a GUI and CorePlus has extra apps). The book,
"Into the core - A look at Tiny Core Linux" is available
[online](http://tinycorelinux.net/book.html).

### Heavy-weight RPM-based Linuxes

  * [openSUSE](https://www.opensuse.org/)
  * [Red Hat (you need to sign up as a Developer, I believe).](https://www.redhat.com/en)
  * [AlmaLinux - currently 1:1 binary compatible with Red Hat Enterprise Linux](https://almalinux.org/)

## Creating bootable installation media for downloaded iso files

  * Startup Disc Creator (aka usb-creator-gtk) - for creating install media for different releases of Linux etc. Brasero to record isos onto DVD or CD
  * To create a USB memory stick to boot a single iso, use usb-creator-gtk. If you want multiple isos on a memory stick, see [Ventoy](https://www.ventoy.net/en/index.html). 
  * [Rufus](https://rufus.ie/en/) create bootable USB flash drives (nice GUI etc) in Windows.

### Linux for phones and other mobile devices (e.g. tablets?)

It's early days yet and I haven't tried this myself. However,
[postmarketos](https://postmarketos.org/) might be of interest.

## Free Software that runs on both Windows and Linux

  * See [here](https://directory.fsf.org/wiki/Collection:Windows) for a list of popular paid-for Windows programmes and links to their Free Software equivalents that can be used on Windows and Linux..
  * Download LibreOffice from [www.libreoffice.org](https://www.libreoffice.org/) or install the package libreoffice. Many people use it instead of Microsoft Office. LibreOffice provides tools for word-processing (Writer), spreadsheet (Calc), presentation tool (Impress), drawing and flowcharting and simple Desktop Publishing tool (Draw), database (Base) and "Maths" for editing mathematics. See [here](https://documentation.libreoffice.org/en/english-documentation/) for free information.
  * For serious Desktop Publishing use Scribus. Either download it from [here](https://www.scribus.net/) or install the package scribus. Try Googling for a "scribus tutorial" for more information..
  * For photo or image manipulation, download GIMP from here:- <https://www.gimp.org> or install the package gimp. A user guide can be found [here](https://www.gimp.org/docs/). .
  * For diagrams etc, a scalar graphics editor (that treats drawings as a series of individual shapes), see something like [Inkscape](https://inkscape.org/). Tutorials can be found [here](https://inkscape.org/learn/tutorials/). Or you can install the package "dia" to edit diagrams - see [here](https://wiki.gnome.org/Apps/Dia/) for more details. For mind maps, try the package "freemind" to install it on Linux, you can download it for Windows from [here](https://freemind.sourceforge.net/wiki/index.php/DownloadW).
  * For fun, free fonts see <https://www.google.com/fonts>.
  * To wipe confidential files and free up disk space, see [BleachBit](https://www.bleachbit.org/).
  * To create a USB memory stick to boot a variety of ISO files, see [Ventoy](https://www.ventoy.net/en/index.html) listed under Creating bootable installation media.
  * To display technical info about your system see [CPU-Z (for Windows)](https://www.cpuid.com/softwares/cpu-z.html) or CPU-X (for Linux) 

## Linux Live CD/DVDs (technical stuff)

Some Linuxes come on "live CDs". This means that you can start a computer with
the CD/DVD inside it and have it run Linux without modifying your hard disc. A
live CD/DVD is stored on a server with a filename ending in ".iso". In order
to use it, you or a friend need to download the iso, use special software to
put it onto recordable CD or DVD, and follow the instructions.

  * If your Windows computer is heavily infected with viruses, search on [https://www.microsoft.com/](https://www.microsoft.com) and search for "Windows Defender Offline" where you can download an iso, record it to CD-R using special software, and then use that to boot your computer and remove rootkits and other sneaky nasties. You can possibly use CAINE (see below) to copy data off the hard drive (see below). 
  * [CAINE](https://www.caine-live.net/) is for Linux experts only and is the "Computer Aided INvestigative Environment" and I have used it to rescue data from a poorly Windows system.
  * As well as CAINE, there is [Kali Linux](https://www.kali.org/) which I have not tried yet.
  * [Rescuezilla (GitHub)](https://github.com/rescuezilla/rescuezilla/releases) see article on [The Register](https://www.theregister.com/2024/05/16/rescuezilla_2_5/). Good tool for imaging and restoring drives.
  * [Clonezilla](https://clonezilla.org/) is a live CD that is a (hard disc) partitioning and cloning programme. It needs plenty of disc space but is intelligent - it only copies sectors that have information in them.
  * [aban](https://aban.derobert.net/) is an open-source alternative to [dban](https://dban.org/). They will both wipe one or more hard discs attached to your computer.
  * [GParted](https://gparted.org/) will resize, copy, move and potentially rescue files on a computer's hard disc.
  * [Hiren's Boot CD](https://www.hirensbootcd.org/) is a "first aid kit" for your computer.
  * [memtest86+](https://www.memtest.org/) will help you check your PC's memory, if you suspect that your computer is faulty..
  * [Rescatux & Super Grub 2 Disk](https://www.supergrubdisk.org/rescatux/) will fix filesystems, wipe passwords (Linux/Windows), make a user a sudoer.
  * [SystemRescue CD](https://www.system-rescue.org/) is a collection of many Linux packages. It is intended for use when you need to fix a problem on your computer.

## Linux Software I have played with on Linux

This can come in a number of formats. Some as packages (aka .deb files), some
as Snaps. There is a debate over which is the better format. Here is a mixed
collection of software that I like to use on a day to day basis:-

  * LibreOffice - office package already mentioned previously on this page.
  * emacs - a text editor with a LISP programming engine (I am still getting to grips with emacs Lisp)
  * bash - a command line / scripting language that is built into Ubuntu Linux
  * Firefox - web browser
  * Stuff to try: usbguard - dealing with rogue USB devices , usbview - graphical representation of USB devices plugged in, fuse-emulator-gtk - Specrum Emulator, [KiCAD - Electronic Design Automation](https://www.kicad.org/about/kicad/)

## Notes on markdown and HTML

  * [Getting started with Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/getting-started/)
  * [Ubuntu - html-to-markdown uses the html2markdown command](https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/man1/html-to-markdown.1.html)

Created : Years Ago. Last update : 23rd February 2025 [(This page
online)](https://github.com/ian-bruntlett/TECH-Manuals/blob/main/tm-free-
software.md) [Validating a web page.](http://validator.w3.org/nu/#file)

